Women's Basketball ranked number one in NAIA poll
Women's Basketball - Tue, Feb. 13, 2018
Portsmouth, Ohio – Shawnee State women's basketball are ranked number one in the NAIA Division I Women's Basketball Coaches' Poll for the first time in program history.
The Bears moved up one spot in the poll after Freed-Hardeman (Tenn.), who had been number one in the previous two polls, lost to Columbia (Mo.) on February 1. Shawnee State received 219 points in this week's poll, and received all nine first place votes. Shawnee State are the third team to hold the number one spot this season.
The number one ranking is the first for Shawnee State since joining NAIA Division I in 2010-11. The Bears have not been number one in the NAIA Coaches Poll in Division I or Division II since December 11, 2001, when SSU was ranked first in the Division II poll.
Today's poll also sets up a key game at the top of the NAIA poll, as Shawnee State will bring their number one ranking up against number three Campbellsville on Thursday night. Campbellsville enter Thursday with their highest ranking of the season so far. Lindsey Wilson were the only other Mid-South Conference team ranked in this week's poll, making an appearance at 10th, one spot lower than last week. Cumberland (Tenn.) remained outside the poll, receiving votes.
Freed-Hardeman dropped to take Shawnee State's place at two. Westmont (Calif.) moved up two spots to fourth and Wayland Baptist (Texas) climbed up to fifth. MidAmerica Nazarene (Kan.) fell one spot to six, while Oklahoma City dropped three places to seventh. Columbia climbed to eighth on the back of their win against Freed-Hardeman, and Vanguard (Calif.) fell one spot to ninth. Lindsey Wilson rounded out the top 10.
Central Methodist (Mo.) were this week's biggest climber in the poll, reaching 16th after not being ranked in the previous poll. Baker (Kan.) were the week's biggest droppers, falling from 12th to out of the poll entirely. The Golden State Athletic Conference (G-SAC) and American Midwest Conference (AMC) each had four teams in the top 25 to lead the poll.
Shawnee State will test our their new number one ranking on Thursday, February 15 when they take on (3) Campbellsville at Waller Gymnasium. Tip-off is set for 6:00pm.
2017-18 NAIA Division I Women's Basketball Coaches' Top 25 Poll – No. 5 (Feb. 13)
RANK

