Ole Miss Basketball: Rebels Hoops Enter Madlock Era On Road
More headlines around FanSided:
More News at Ole Hotty Toddy
The Arkansas Razorbacks are much like the other SEC teams which have somewhat struggled. They can play well enough at times to beat anybody but have had problems with consistency at times. Of course, when you scout the Hogs you only have to look at their team leaders to fully appreciate the threat they are.
Senior guard Jaylen Barford leads the Hogs in scoring averaging 18.7 points per game. He also leads the Hogs in steals with 1.2 per game. Barford also averages 3.8 rebounds and 2.8 assists per game.
Another key leader in the Hogs basketball cog is freshman forward Daniel Gafford . Gafford leads the Hogs in field goal percentage hitting 60.3% of his shots while averaging 11.2 points per game. He also leads the Hogs in rebounding with 6.1 boards per game.
Senior guard Daryl Macon leads Arkansas in assists with 4.0 per game. Macon also averages 17.4 points and 2.8 rebounds each outing. Then there is senior forward Dustin Thomas who leads the Hogs in 3-point field goal percentage hitting 50.0% of his attempts from the arc. Thomas averages 4.8 points, 4.3 rebounds and 1.0 assist per game.
What To Expect
We can expect Hogs coach Mike Anderson to attempt to play fast against Ole Miss. He knows if he plays the Rebels fast they are prone to committing both turnovers and fouls. If the Hogs do this and are able to produce points then Mike Anderson knows the Hogs have a good shot at taking home a victory.
As for Ole Miss we really can’t be sure what to expect from head coach Andy Kennedy . We have lost count of the different starting lineups this season. We have no idea if one Rebel hits in double digits or if there are three Rebels who do. We do know this, the Rebels don’t have a possible shot at winning unless they play better than the past 5 games.
Want your voice heard? Join the Ole Hotty Toddy team!
Next: AK's Top 5 Greatest Moments!
Of course, we don’t have to wait long to see which Ole Miss basketball team shows up Tuesday night at The Pavilion. The Ole Miss Rebels will host the Arkansas Razorbacks. Tip-off is set for 6pm CT and the game will be televised on the SEC Network. Good luck to the Rebels! Hotty Toddy!

