This story is about High Schools
Published
Feb. 13
UIL gives two-year probation and reprimand to boys basketball teams from DeSoto and Duncanville after brawl
This Story is About...
DeSoto and Duncanville players were involved in a postgame brawl Feb. 6.
By Drew King and                                               Alex Briseño
Note: This story was updated Tuesday night with additional information.
PFLUGERVILLE -- The boys basketball teams from DeSoto and Duncanville were issued two years probation and a public reprimand by the UIL State Executive Committee on Tuesday at the Courtyard Marriott Pflugerville.
DeSoto announces it will forfeit final two regular-season games following brawl between DeSoto and Duncanville players 
The disciplinary action was for the postgame brawl between the teams after DeSoto won 67-46 at Duncanville on Feb. 6. The UIL committee viewed video of the incident from three angles, which showed players and fans involved in the altercation as coaches and security attempted to break up the skirmish on the court.
Probation means that the teams will face more severe penalties if there are any further violations during the probation period. The teams are still eligible for the playoffs.
"It is [serious to be on probation], because whenever you're on probation, you're under a microscope," said Mike Motheral, chairman of the state executive committee. "And so, if there are missteps in your program and you end up in a situation where you're back down here, or some kind of issue that comes up, then the consequences are going to be much more stern as we move forward."
The UIL ruled that DeSoto coach Chris Dyer and Duncanville coach Corey Chism would be publicly reprimanded and placed on two-year probation as well. The state executive committee was disappointed with the coaches' involvement in the discipline process and also requested they be more involved in preventing an incident like this from happening again.
It was disclosed in open session at Tuesday's UIL meeting that two players from each team had already been suspended for the remainder of the season. It was disclosed that additional players from each team had been disciplined, but not suspended for the season. The players who were disciplined were not named.
The day after the brawl, DeSoto ISD self-imposed discipline on its program, announcing that it would forfeit its final two regular-season games and that the district would issue game suspensions for those involved in the incident.
Duncanville opted not to forfeit its remaining district games. Duncanville ISD athletic director Clint Harper said in Tuesday's meeting that the school district didn't want to punish other schools by leaving the opponents without a Senior Night game.
Motheral was pleased with the way both schools handled the incident. That led to Motheral's motion to allow the current consequences imposed by the schools to stand.
"Once this occurred, they came together trying to find out exactly what did happen," Motheral said. "We could have taken it, I guess, a step further with this group. It felt like that both schools had done a really good job trying to deal with it."
Duncanville ISD released a statement Tuesday that said, "Duncanville ISD appreciates the UIL State Executive Committee's due diligence in ruling on this sensitive set of circumstances. Our district's leadership agrees with the committee that such incidents are not acceptable. We appreciate the committee upholding the district's discipline for our players. Moving forward, we are committed to developing and implementing a plan with players and coaches to prevent future incidents."
Duncanville ISD director of external communications Lari Barager said the school district would not have any comment beyond that statement.
DeSoto declined to comment Tuesday on the UIL's findings.
In a previous statement announcing its forfeits and suspensions, DeSoto ISD said, "Regardless of which team may have initiated the altercation, DeSoto ISD makes clear that it does not condone the behavior that took place at last night's game. In all situations, DeSoto ISD maintains an expectation of high character for all district students."
Before the forfeits, DeSoto led District 7-6A with an 11-1 record, Duncanville was second at 10-2 and South Grand Prairie was third at 9-3. DeSoto would still make the playoffs after forfeiting games against Irving Nimitz and South Grand Prairie to finish 11-3 in district.
But going into Tuesday's regular-season finales, Duncanville was 11-2 in district and SGP would be 11-3 after getting a forfeit win over DeSoto. On Tuesday, Duncanville hosts Grand Prairie, which is 3-10 and next-to-last in District 7-6A.
If Duncanville wins Tuesday and wins the district title, it would not have to play the state's No. 1-ranked Class 6A team -- District 6-6A champion Denton Guyer -- until the Region I final. If DeSoto and SGP finish in a two-way tie for second, they would have split their two district games because of DeSoto forfeiting Tuesday's game.
The team that ends up as the No. 2 seed from 7-6A in the playoffs could have to play No. 1 Guyer in the second round. The No. 3 seed from 7-6A could play Guyer in the third round.
DeSoto is ranked No. 6 in the state by the Texas Association of Basketball Coaches. Duncanville, which beat DeSoto 93-86 in double overtime on Jan. 12 in the teams' first district matchup, is ranked No. 7.
Staff writer Greg Riddle contributed to this report.
This Topic is Missing Your Voice.
View Comments

