Save
Reviewing the video of the Wake Forest men’s basketball team’s loss Sunday at Syracuse was rough and necessary, according to Deacon guard Keyshawn Woods.
Specifically, the first half was the rough part. That’s when the Deacons “weren’t moving the ball, we weren’t looking for each other, defensively we weren’t dialed in,” Woods said.
Watching that, the team mired at 9-16 and having lost 10 of its last 11 games also saw video of the second half, when the Deacons “were sharing the ball, we were looking for other people, looking for the high man, driving gaps, dishing it down to Doral (Moore), throwing Doral lobs, we were doing everything we weren’t doing in the first half,” Woods said.
Wake Forest has finished more than half of its ACC schedule, but there’s still time — five games, to be exact — for the Deacons to do some of the things in the closing stretch of the season that have escaped them during a 2-11 start to ACC play.
It starts with tonight’s game against Georgia Tech, one of two home games this week in which the Deacons are favored to win, according to KenPom projections.
“We’ve talked about it before as a team and as a staff that there are some possessions where, if we win those possessions, it could possibly be a different outcome to the game. Not guaranteed,” Coach Danny Manning of Wake Forest said. “But we feel like we’re getting there, in terms of cutting down on the possessions that don’t go as well as planned, offensively and defensively, but we’ve got to continue to cut those numbers down.”
In its last five games, Wake Forest plays the teams in 13th, eighth, 15th, 12th and again 13th in the ACC standings entering Tuesday night’s games. For the Deacons, who are 14th, there’s hope left.
“We’ve been talking about this for the course of the season. ... It’s just finally a time that we’ve got to do what we say instead of keep talking about it, to be honest,” Woods said. “We’ve just got to do it now.”
Get today’s top stories right in your inbox. Sign up for our daily morning newsletter.

