Nebraska-Maryland basketball: Recap, stats, analysis (February 13, 2018)
Nebraska basketball and Maryland meet for only the sixth time in series history on Tuesday evening.
John Peterson/Getty Images
@erinsorensen
Posted 1 week ago
Nebraska basketball defeated Maryland 70-66 at home on Tuesday evening. Find the box score, key plays and more from the game below.
Nebraska-Maryland basketball box score
— Land of 10 Nebraska (@Landof10Huskers) February 14, 2018
Nebraska-Maryland basketball live updates, score
Nebraska-Maryland basketball: Game time, information
Nebraska and Maryland play at 7 p.m. ET on Tuesday, Feb. 13.
Time: 7 p.m. ET
Location: Pinnacle Bank Arena, Lincoln, Neb.
How can I watch the Nebraska-Maryland basketball game on TV and online?
Nebraska and Maryland will be broadcast on Big Ten Network.  BTN2Go  and  FOX Sports Go  will have the livestream.
Kevin Kugler and Robbie Hummel will call the game.
How can I listen to the Nebraska-Maryland basketball game on the radio?
Nebraska and Maryland can be heard on the Husker Sports Network, including 590 AM (Omaha), 1400 AM (Lincoln) and 880 AM (Lexington). Online radio will be available at  Huskers.com , on the Huskers App, and on TuneIn Radio and the TuneIn Radio App. The radio broadcast begins one hour prior to tip-off.
Kent Pavelka and Jake Muhleisen will have the call.
Nebraska-Maryland basketball preview
Nebraska (19-8, 10-4 Big Ten) and Maryland (17-10, 6-8 Big Ten) meet for the sixth time in series history on Tuesday. All six meetings between the two have come since the Terrapins joined the Big Ten.
Maryland leads the all-time series 4-1, with four of the meetings having been decided by 5 points or less. Nebraska’s only win against the Terrapins came last season in a 67-65 comeback victory.
Nebraska comes into the matchup with Maryland looking for its 20th win of the season. The Huskers’ 19 wins are tied for the most in one season under coach Tim Miles. If Nebraska can get the 20th win against Maryland, it would be the first time the Huskers have hit 20 wins in a season since 2007-08. It also would give Nebraska six consecutive conference wins for the first time in 20 years.
The Huskers are playing some of their best basketball, having won seven of their last eight games. The only loss during that stretch came to Big Ten leader Ohio State. Nebraska most recently defeated Rutgers on Saturday, limiting the Scarlet Knights to 35 percent shooting in a 67-55 victory.
Against Rutgers, James Palmer Jr. had 15 points and 4 assists. He paced four Huskers in double figures. Isaiah Roby also had a strong game against the Scarlet Knights, posting his second double-double of the season with 10 points and 11 rebounds.
Roby, a 6-foot-8 sophomore forward, impressed with a dunk against Rutgers that caused the Big Ten Network camera to go out of focus . His performance in Nebraska’s last five games also has led him to average 10.8 points, 7.8 rebounds and 2.4 blocks per game.
As for Maryland, the Terrapins come into the matchup after a 73-57 victory against Northwestern on Saturday. It was one of Maryland’s best wins this season, as sophomore Kevin Huerter led the Terrapins with 22 points and 5 rebounds. Huerter is considered one of the better playmakers in the Big Ten, averaging 14.8 ppg, 5.4 rpg, and 3.5 apg. Sophomore guard Anthony Cowan is not far behind, averaging 16.2 ppg, 5.0 apg and 4.4 rpg.
The Tuesday matchup also marks Red Cross Night. Nebraska student-athletes will collect donations for the Red Cross during halftime.
 

