BASKETBALL; Oregon St. Player Who Had Stroke Dies
AP
Published: January 21, 1992
INGLEWOOD, Calif., Jan. 20— Earnest Killum, who decided to play basketball for Oregon State despite a blood-clotting disorder, died today, three days after suffering his second stroke in six months.
Dr. Carl Orfuss, a neurologist here at Daniel Freeman Memorial Hospital who treated Killum, said that the death of the 20-year-old sophomore was not related to his playing basketball.
"It is the opinion of myself and all the physicians who treated Earnest here that he succumbed to a disease affecting the blood vessels and that his resumption of basketball in no way precipitated the terminal event," Orfuss said.
An autopsy on Killum was scheduled for Tuesday.
Killum, who gained medical clearance to join the Beavers in late December, suffered a stroke last Friday when he collapsed at a hotel. On Thursday night, he had scored 13 points in 16 minutes of playing time in a game against Southern Cal.
On Saturday, as his teammates lost to U.C.L.A. in overtime, he appeared to be improving, but early Sunday morning, he lapsed into a coma, the team doctor, Richard Cronk, said. Killum was placed on a respirator after his condition worsened.
Last July, Killum, who had to sit out his freshman season because of academic problems, had a blood clot removed from his left arm after suffering a mild stroke. Other, inoperable clots were discovered, and doctors began treating him with Coumadin, an anticoagulant drug whose side effects include "an increase in bruisability or an increase in bleeding," said Gae Ryan, assistant director of pharmacy at University Hospital in Portland, Ore.
His condition improved, and after a battery of tests were conducted at Oregon Health Sciences University in Portland, he was cleared to join the team Dec. 27.
A specialist, who asked Oregon State officials that he not be identified, determined that the anticoagulant dosage could be reduced to lessen the risk of a bleeding injury.
In the days leading up to his collapse, Killum, who was from Los Angeles, was apparently feeling fine, the Oregon State basketball coach, Jim Anderson, said. On Wednesday night, he had attended a ceremony at his alma mater, Lynwood High School, where his number was retired.
 

