Save
Getting to play one final college basketball season with her younger sister was a no-brainer for Ricki Mock.
“I figured I wouldn’t get an opportunity to play with her again, so I might as well take this opportunity before I decided to go further into school,” said Ricki Mock, referring to Kayce Mock. “It has been a lot of fun so far ... it’s nice playing with her again and it’s still easy.”
Ricki and Kayce Mock, who graduated from Sutherlin High School one year apart, are in their sophomore seasons for the Clackamas Community College women’s basketball team. Their coach is Jim Martineau, another former Sutherlin player and graduate.
The Mocks’ previous time as teammates came in 2015, when the Sutherlin High girls won the Class 4A crown with a 28-0 record.
“It’s kind of been like a childhood dream, to play college ball with my sister,” said Kayce Mock. “It was like riding a bike. We played so long together, and it was easy to start where we left off.”
The Mock sisters are both starters for the fourth-ranked Cougars of Oregon City. Clackamas improved to 18-4 overall and 9-1 in the Southern Region Saturday with a 64-37 victory over Portland at home.
Clackamas is one game behind No. 1 Umpqua (23-0, 10-0) in the South race.
Kayce Mock, a 6-foot forward, is winding down her second year with the Cougars after leading Sutherlin to its third straight OSAA Class 4A championship in 2016. She was selected the 4A player of the year as a senior.
Ricki Mock, a 5-8 guard, was a member of Sutherlin’s state title teams in 2014 and 2015. She played her freshman year in college at Southwestern Oregon Community College in Coos Bay, then transferred to Umpqua Community College last year and didn’t play basketball.
Martineau is tickled to have both of them on his team.
“Kayce is the easiest kid you’ll ever coach, until Ricki shows up,” he said. “She’s just the same as Kayce. Play hard, doesn’t ask questions and doesn’t care about stats. She just cares about winning and playing hard.
“It’s fun to watch those two,” the coach added. “There’s no drama and they’re just unselfish people. Adding Ricki helps us a ton. She’s just a tough kid ... her competitiveness, more than anything, spreads throughout the team.”
Kayce Mock, a second-team all-league selection last year and member of the All-Defensive Team, leads Clackamas this season in minutes played (33.6 per game), rebounding (14.3) and blocked shots (3.5). She leads the Northwest Athletic Conference in rebounding and is second in blocks.
She’s also averaging 12.5 points, 2.4 assists and 1.6 steals.
Kayce Mock isn’t a prolific scorer, but impacts the game with her rebounding, passing and defense, according to Martineau. She only scored four points against Portland, but had 15 rebounds, five blocks and four assists.
“Kayce is just so unselfish,” the coach said. “I have to get after her to shoot the ball more. Defensively, she’s been unbelievable. She’ll have a chance to earn a scholarship to go play somewhere (next year).”
Ricki Mock ranks second behind her sister in minutes played (32.2). She averages 6.8 points, 6.6 rebounds, 3.9 assists and 2.0 steals.
“Scoring is not her forte, but she’s a versatile kid,” Martineau said. “She’s a great passer and doesn’t turn the ball over.”
“Ricki’s big thing is hustle. She’ll outhustle anyone on the court,” Kayce said. “She’’ll never give up and her aggressiveness on the court brings the team up.”
Off the court, the sisters live together and have the same classes.
“We’re basically together all the time,” Ricki said. “For the most part, we get along really well. We may get on each other’s nerves once in a while and need to take a break and separate ourselves, but get along 95 percent of the time.”
“We have moments ... we know when we need to go to separate rooms,” Kayce said with a chuckle. “Most of the time it’s all good. We lived together 18 years (before), so it’s not much different.”
Sports Editor Tom Eggers can be reached at 541-957-4220.

